---
title: "An Efficient Graph Learning System for Emotion Recognition Inspired by the Cognitive Prior Graph of EEG Brain Network"
collection: publications
category: manuscripts
permalink: /publication/2024-06-05-paper-1
excerpt: 'To realize the efficient decoding of emotional EEG, we propose a graph learning system [Graph Convolutional Network framework with Brain network initial inspiration and Fused attention mechanism (BF-GCN)] inspired by the brain cognitive mechanism to automatically learn graph patterns from emotional EEG and improve the performance of EEG emotion recognition.'
date: 2024-06-05
venue: 'IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems'
paperurl: 'https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/10549833'
citation: 'C. Li, Y. Pan et al., "An Efficient Graph Learning System for Emotion Recognition Inspired by the Cognitive Prior Graph of EEG Brain Network," in IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems.'
---

**Abstract:**

Benefiting from the high-temporal resolution of electroencephalogram (EEG), EEG-based emotion recognition has become one of the hotspots of affective computing. For EEG-based emotion recognition systems, it is crucial to utilize state-of-the-art learning strategies to automatically learn emotion-related brain cognitive patterns from emotional EEG signals, and the learned stable cognitive patterns effectively ensure the robustness of the emotion recognition system. In this work, to realize the efficient decoding of emotional EEG, we propose a graph learning system [Graph Convolutional Network framework with Brain network initial inspiration and Fused attention mechanism (BF-GCN)] inspired by the brain cognitive mechanism to automatically learn graph patterns from emotional EEG and improve the performance of EEG emotion recognition. In the proposed BF-GCN, three graph branches, i.e., cognition-inspired functional graph branch, data-driven graph branch, and fused common graph branch, are first elaborately designed to automatically learn emotional cognitive graph patterns from emotional EEG signals. And then, the attention mechanism is adopted to further capture the brain activation graph patterns that are related to emotion cognition to achieve an efficient representation of emotional EEG signals. Essentially, the proposed BF-CGN model is a cognition-inspired graph learning neural network model, which utilizes the spectral graph filtering theory in the automatic learning and extracting of emotional EEG graph patterns. To evaluate the performance of the BF-GCN graph learning system, we conducted subject-dependent and subject-independent experiments on two public datasets, i.e., SEED and SEED-IV. The proposed BF-GCN graph learning system has achieved 97.44% (SEED) and 89.55% (SEED-IV) in subject-dependent experiments, and the results in subject-independent experiments have achieved 92.72% (SEED) and 82.03% (SEED-IV), respectively. The state-of-the-art performance indicates that the proposed BF-GCN graph learning system has a robust performance in EEG-based emotion recognition, which provides a promising direction for affective computing.