---
title: "DuA: Dual Attentive Transformer in Long-Term Continuous EEG Emotion Analysis"
collection: publications
category: manuscripts
permalink: /publication/2024-07-30-paper-1
excerpt: 'The DuA transformer’s ability to adapt to varying signal lengths and its superior performance across diverse subjects.'
date: 2024-07-30
venue: 'arxiv'
paperurl: 'https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.20519'
citation: 'Y. Pan, Q. Liu et al., DuA: Dual Attentive Transformer in Long-Term Continuous EEG Emotion Analysis.'
---
**Abstract:**

Affective brain-computer interfaces (aBCIs) are increasingly recognized for their potential in monitoring and interpreting
 emotional states through electroencephalography (EEG) signals. Current EEG-based emotion recognition methods perform well with
 short segments of EEG data (known as segment-based emotion analysis). However, these methods encounter significant challenges
 in real-life scenarios where emotional states evolve over extended periods. To address this issue, we propose a Dual Attentive (DuA)
 transformer framework for long-term continuous EEG emotion analysis. Unlike segment-based approaches, the DuA transformer
 processes an entire EEG trial as a whole, identifying emotions at the trial level, referred to as trial-based emotion analysis. This
 framework is designed to adapt to varying signal lengths, providing a substantial advantage over traditional methods. The DuA
 transformer incorporates three key modules: the spatial-spectral network module, the temporal network module, and the transfer
 learning module. The spatial-spectral network module simultaneously captures spatial and spectral information from EEG signals,
 while the temporal network module detects temporal dependencies within long-term EEG data. The transfer learning module enhances
 the model’s adaptability across different subjects and conditions. We extensively evaluate the DuA transformer using a self-constructed
 long-term EEG emotion database, along with two benchmark EEG emotion databases. On the basis of the trial-based
 leave-one-subject-out cross-subject cross-validation protocol, our experimental results demonstrate that the proposed DuA transformer
 significantly outperforms existing methods in long-term continuous EEG emotion analysis, with an average enhancement of 5.28%.
 The DuA transformer’s ability to adapt to varying signal lengths and its superior performance across diverse subjects and conditions
 highlight its potential for real-world applications, enhancing the overall user experience and efficacy of aBCI systems.