---
title: "Real-Time EEG Emotion Recognition from Dynamic Mixed Spatiotemporal Graph Learning"
collection: publications
category: conferences
permalink: /publication/2025-10-27-paper-1
excerpt: 'We proposed DMSGL provides a promising solution for realizing real-time
emotion recognition and further exploring related applications. '
date: 2025-10-27
venue: 'ACM Multimedia 2025'
paperurl: 'http://academicpages.github.io/files/paper3.pdf'
citation: 'Y. Pan, C. Li et al. Real-Time EEG Emotion Recognition from Dynamic Mixed Spatiotemporal Graph Learning. ACM Multimedia 2025.'
---

**Abstract**

Real-time emotion recognition provides promising applications for mental healthcare monitoring and human-computer interaction
design. Electroencephalography (EEG) emotion recognition has become a hot topic in the field of affective computing and intelligent brain-computer interface (BCI), and it is a feasible solution
for achieving real-time emotion recognition. However, due to the
uncertainty and individual specificity of emotional cognition, there
are still some challenges in achieving efficient online emotion decoding applications. To address this, in this work, we propose an
online emotion decoding method named DMSGL (Real-Time EEG
Emotion Recognition from Dynamic Mixed Spatiotemporal Graph
Learning). Specifically, in the DMSGL, we propose to explore the
latent emotion-related graph features from EEG with cognitioninspired and data-driven learning strategies, and the temporal analysis with attention learning is utilized to further extract the robust
spatiotemporal graph patterns for efficient EEG emotion decoding.
Both simulated online emotion decoding and real-time emotion
monitoring experimental results have consistently indicated that
the proposed DMSGL can effectively satisfy the application requirements of real-time emotion decoding and achieves an accuracy of 68.35% in real-world online scenarios. Compared with other baseline methods, the proposed DMSGL has improved by 2-5% in the
scenario of real-time emotion recognition. In conclusion, the proposed DMSGL provides a promising solution for realizing real-time
emotion recognition and further exploring related applications. Our
code is released on https://github.com/UESTC-BAC/DMSGL.
